taralamadhukṛt vṛnde vṛndāvane'tha manohare
paśupaśiśubhi: sākaṃ vatsānupālanalolupa: |
haladharasakho deva śrīman viceritha dhārayan
gavalamuralīvetraṃ netrābhirāmatanudyuti: ||1||
tarala-madhukṛt-vṛnde	with fleeting honey bee swarms
vṛndāvane-atha	in Vrindaavana, then
manohare	the beautiful one
paśupa-śiśubhi: sākaṃ	with the cowherd boys
vatsa-anupālana-lolupa:	in tending the calves engrossed
haladhara-sakha:	accompanied by Haladhara
deva śrīman	O Lord! Consort of Laxmi!
viceritha dhārayan	(Thou) moved about carrying
gavala-muralī-vetraṃ	a horn flute and cane
netra-abhirāma-tanu-dyuti:	pleasing to the eyes (with Thy) radiant form
In the beautiful Vrindaavana swarms of honey bees would fleet around. There, O Auspicious Lord! Consort of Laxmi! Accompanied by Haladhara and other cowherd boys, Thou moved about with Thy radiant form pleasing to the eyes. Keen on tending the cows, Thou carried a horn, flute and a cane.
vihitajagatīrakṣaṃ lakṣmīkarāmbujalālitaṃ
dadati caraṇadvandvaṃ vṛndāvane tvayi pāvane |
kimiva na babhau sampatsampūritaṃ taruvallarī-
saliladharaṇīgotrakṣetrādikaṃ kamalāpate ||2||
vihita-jagatī-rakṣaṃ	infused with the protection of the world
lakṣmī-kara-ambuja-lālitaṃ	by Laxmi's lotus like hands caressed
dadati caraṇa-dvandvam	(when Thou) places (Thy) two feet
vṛndāvane tvayi pāvane	in Vrindaavana, by Thee, in the holy (Vrindaavana)
kim-iva na babhau	what all did not take place
sampat-sampūritaṃ	with prosperity full of
taru-vallarī-salila-	the trees, creepers, waters
dharaṇī-gotra-kṣetra-ādikaṃ	land, hills, and fields etc
kamalāpate	O Consort of Laxmi!
O Consort of Laxmi! Thou set Thy two feet, which are caressed by Laxmi's lotus hands and which are infused with the protection of the world, in Vrindaavana. When Thou did so, the trees, creepers, waters, lands, hills and fields and what all was not full of prosperity!
vilasadulape kāntārānte samīraṇaśītale
vipulayamunātīre govardhanācalamūrdhasu |
lalitamuralīnāda: sañcārayan khalu vātsakaṃ
kvacana divase daityaṃ vatsākṛtiṃ tvamudaikṣathā: ||3||
vilasat-ulape	in the lavish grass meadows
kāntāra-ante	at the forests' end
samīraṇa-śītale	with cool breeze (blowing)
vipula-yamunā-tīre	on the vast banks of Yamunaa
govardhana-acala-mūrdhasu	on the Govardhana mountain peaks
lalita-muralī-nāda:	with the gentle flute sound
sañcārayan khalu vātsakaṃ	(leading) to graze the calves, indeed
kvacana divase	one day
daityaṃ vatsa-ākṛtim	an Asura in the form of a calf
tvam-udaikṣathā:	Thou saw
In the lavish grass meadows at the end of the forests, the cool breeze was blowing on the vast banks of the Yamunaa river, on the peaks of the Govardhana mountain, Thou were playing the flute softly as Thou lead the calves to graze. One day, Thou saw an Asura in the form of a calf.
rabhasavilasatpucchaṃ vicchāyato'sya vilokayan
kimapi valitaskandhaṃ randhrapratīkṣamudīkṣitam |
tamatha caraṇe bibhradvibhrāmayan muhuruccakai:
kuhacana mahāvṛkṣe cikṣepitha kṣatajīvitam ||4||
rabhasa-vilasat-pucchaṃ	with force wagging the tail
vicchāyata:-	while walking
asya vilokayan	his (calf's) gaze
kim-api valita-skandhaṃ	with somewhat turning his neck
randhra-pratīkṣam-udīkṣitam	for a loop hole waiting to see
tam-atha caraṇe	him, then with two legs
vibhrat-vibhrāmayan	catching hold of and swirling
muhu:-uccakai:	again and again very fast
kuhacana mahāvṛkṣe	on a big tree
cikṣepitha kṣata-jīvitam	(Thou) threw, as he lost his life
As the Asura walked about, wagging its tail briskly and forcefully, it turned its head in a strange way looking for a loop hole (an opportunity) to strike. Thou caught him by his two legs and swirling him very fast again and again, threw him on a big tree just as he lost his life.
nipatati mahādaitye jātyā durātmani tatkṣaṇaṃ
nipatanajavakṣuṇṇakṣoṇīruhakṣatakānane |
divi parimilat vṛndā vṛndārakā: kusumotkarai:
śirasi bhavato harṣādvarṣanti nāma tadā hare ||5||
nipatati mahā-daitye	(when) killed was the mighty Asura
jātyā durātmani	(who) by birth was evil minded
tat-kṣaṇam	then at that time
nipatana-java-	(because of) the falling force
kṣuṇṇa-kṣoṇī:-	by breaking of the top of
uha-kṣata-kānane	the trees (and so) destroyed the forests
divi parimilat vṛndā	in the skies, the assembled groups
vṛndārakā:	of gods
kusuma-utkarai:	with flowers' heaps
śirasi bhavata:	on Thy head
harṣāt-varṣanti	with joy, showering
nāma tadā hare	indeed, then, O God!
By the impact of the fall of the Asura who was evil minded by birth, the tops of the trees were broken and the forests were destroyed. O God! The gods then assembling in the skies showered heaps of flowers on Thy head, in joy.
surabhilatamā mūrdhanyūrdhvaṃ kuta: kusumāvalī
nipatati tavetyukto bālai: sahelamudairaya: |
jhaṭiti danujakṣepeṇordhvaṃ gatastarumaṇḍalāt
kusumanikara: so'yaṃ nūnaṃ sameti śanairiti ||6||
surabhilatamā	most fragrant
mūrdhani-ūrdhvaṃ	on top of (Thy) head
kuta: kusumāvalī	from where cluster of flowers
nipatati tava-	is falling (on) Thy (head)
iti-ukta: bālai:	thus was said by the children
sahelam-udairaya:	jokingly (Thou) said
jhaṭiti	suddenly
danuja-kṣepeṇa-	by the Asura's throwing
ūrdhvaṃ gata:-	rising upward
taru-maṇḍalāt	from the clusters of the trees
kusuma-nikara:	the heaps of flowers
sa:-ayaṃ nūnaṃ	that this indeed
sameti śanai:-iti	is coming down slowly, thus
The cowherd children asked Thee as to from where the extremely fragrant heap of flowers were falling on the top of Thy head. Thou jokingly told them that when the Asura was thrown , the flowers blooming on the clusters of the trees rose up and indeed those flowers were coming down slowly now.
kvacana divase bhūyo bhūyastare paruṣātape
tapanatanayāpātha: pātuṃ gatā bhavadādaya: |
calitagarutaṃ prekṣāmāsurbakaṃ khalu vismrṛtaṃ
kṣitidharagarucchede kailāsaśailamivāparam ||7||
kvacana divase	on another day
bhūya: bhūyastare	again, again very much
paruṣa-ātape	(when) it was very hot
tapana-tanayā-pātha:	the sun daughter's waters (waters of Yamunaa)
pātuṃ gatā	to drink went
bhavat-ādaya:	Thou and others
calita-garutam	moving very quickly (the wings)
prekṣāmāsu:-bakaṃ	(Thou) saw a crane
khalu vismṛtaṃ	indeed forgotten
kṣitidhara-garut-chede	(when) the mountains' wings were cut (by Indra)
kailāsa-śailam-iva-aparam	Kailaash mountain like another
Again on another day, when it was extremely hot, Thou and the others went to drink the water of river Yamunaa who is the daughter of the Sun. Thou saw a crane flapping its wings very quickly, which looked like the mountain Kailaash whose wings Indra forgot to cut when he was cutting off the wings of the mountains.
pibati salilaṃ gopavrāte bhavantamabhidruta:
sa kila nigilannagniprakhyaṃ punardrutamudvaman |
dalayitumagāttroṭyā: koṭyā tadā''śu bhavān vibho
khalajanabhidācuñcuścañcū pragṛhya dadāra tam ||8||
pibati salilaṃ	drinking the water (when)
gopavrāte	the cowherd boys were,
bhavantam-abhidruta:	towards Thee charging
sa kila nigilan-	he indeed swallowing Thee
agni-prakhyam	fire-like (Thee)
puna:-drutam-udvaman	again hastily spitting out
dalayitum-agāt-	to tear (Thee) came
troṭyā: koṭyā	by the beaks point
tadā-āśu	then quickly
bhavān vibho	Thou O Lord!
khala-jana-bhidā-cuñcu:-	in the evil people destroying expert
cañcū pragṛhya	(his Asura's) beak, catching hold of
dadāra tam	tore him apart
When the cowherd boys were drinking water, he charged towards Thee and swallowed Thee and again hastily spit Thee out like a ball of fire. He then came to tear Thee by the point of its beak. O Lord! Thou who are adapt at destroying the evil people, catching hold of his beak, tore him apart.
sapadi sahajāṃ sandraṣṭuṃ vā mṛtāṃ khalu pūtanā-
manujamaghamapyagre gatvā pratīkṣitumeva vā |
śamananilayaṃ yāte tasmin bake sumanogaṇe
kirati sumanovṛndaṃ vṛndāvanāt gṛhamaiyathā: ||9||
sapadi sahajāṃ	hastily, (his) sister
sandraṣṭuṃ vā mṛtāṃ	to see or the dead
khalu pūtanām-	indeed Pootanaa
anujam-agham-api-	(Or) the younger brother Agha also
agre gatvā	ahead going
pratīkṣitum-eva vā	or awaiting him only
śamana-nilayaṃ	to the abode of death
yāte tasmin bake	his having gone, the crane's
sumanogaṇe	(when) the host of gods
kirati sumana-vṛndaṃ	was showering heaps of flowers
vṛndāvanāt	from Vrindaavana
gṛham-aiyathā:	to home (Thou) went
In no time the crane demon reached the abode of death as if to see his dead sister Pootanaa or as if to welcome his younger brother Aghaasura who was to follow him. As the host of gods were showering heaps of flowers, Thou went home from the woods of Vrindaavana.
lalitamuralīnādaṃ dūrānniśamya vadhūjanai-
stvaritamupagamyārādārūḍhamodamudīkṣita: |
janitajananīnandānanda: samīraṇamandira-
prathitavasate śaure dūrīkuruṣva mamāmayān ||10||
lalita-muralī-nādaṃ	the sweet sound of the flute
dūrāt-niśamya	from far hearing
vadhūjanai:-	by the Gopikas
tvaritam-upagamya-ārāt-	hastily approaching near
ārūḍha-modam-udīkṣita:	in extreme joy (they) saw (Thee)
janita-jananī-nanda-ānanda:	causing joy to (Thy) mother and Nanda
samīraṇa-mandira-prathita-vasate	in the Guruvaayur temple, famous, living
śaure	O Shauri! (Vaasudeva)
dūrī kuruṣva	expel
mama-āmayān	my ailments
The Gopikaas heard the sweet sound of Thy flute and rushed with great joy to have a glimpse of Thee. Thy parents Yashoda and Nanda were also very delighted to see Thee. O Thou Shauri! (Vaasudeva) Who are well known to be residing in the famous temple of Guruvaayur, be pleased to expel my ailments.